left aligned, adaptive, rolling max (#7264)
Rdatatable/data.table: NEWS.md

## data.table [v1.17.99](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/milestone/35)  (in development)

### BREAKING CHANGE

1. Rolling functions `frollmean` and `frollsum` used to treat `Inf` and `-Inf` as `NA` when using default `algo="fast"`. It has been changed now and infinite values are not treated as `NA` anymore. If your input into those functions has `Inf` or `-Inf` then you will be affected by this change. As a result, argument that controls behavior of `NA`s has been renamed from `hasNA` to `has.nf` (_has non-finite_), as of 1.18.0 both will work, former with a warning.
    ```r
    ## before
    frollsum(c(1,2,3,Inf,5,6), 2)
    #[1] NA  3  5 NA NA 11

>     ## 1.18.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ## now
```

## data.table [v1.17.99](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/milestone/35)  (in development)

### BREAKING CHANGE

1. Rolling functions `frollmean` and `frollsum` used to treat `Inf` and `-Inf` as `NA` when using default `algo="fast"`. It has been changed now and infinite values are not treated as `NA` anymore. If your input into those functions has `Inf` or `-Inf` then you will be affected by this change.
```r
## before

> frollsum(c(1,2,3,Inf,5,6), 2)

Reviewer 2: What happens/should happen at
`frollsum(c(1,2,-Inf,Inf,5,6), 2)`?

> 1. Rolling functions `frollmean` and `frollsum` used to treat `Inf` and `-Inf` as `NA` when using default `algo="fast"`. It has been changed now and infinite values are not treated as `NA` anymore. If your input into those functions has `Inf` or `-Inf` then you will be affected by this change. As a result, argument that controls behavior of `NA`s has been renamed from `hasNA` to `has.nf` (_has non-finite_), as of 1.18.0 both will work, former with a warning.

Reviewer: I prefer to lead with what's changed, then describe the old behavior, should make it easier to read.
```suggestion
1. Rolling functions `frollmean` and `frollsum` distinguish `Inf`/`-Inf` from `NA` when `algo="fast"` (previously then were considered the same). If your input into those functions has `Inf` or `-Inf` then you will be affected by this change. As a result, the argument that controls the handling of `NA`s has been renamed from `hasNA` to `has.nf` (_has non-finite_). `hasNA` continues to work with a warning, for now.
```

Reviewer: it would also be good to give a minimal example of before/after output directly here in the NEWS.

> ```r
> ## before
> frollsum(c(1,2,3,Inf,5,6), 2)
> #[1] NA  3  5 NA NA 11
> 
> ## 1.18.0
> frollsum(c(1,2,3,Inf,5,6), 2)
> #[1]  NA   3   5 Inf Inf  11
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
    ```r
    ## before
    frollsum(c(1,2,3,Inf,5,6), 2)
    #[1] NA  3  5 NA NA 11

    ## 1.18.0
    frollsum(c(1,2,3,Inf,5,6), 2)
    #[1]  NA   3   5 Inf Inf  11
````
```

15. New function `isoyear()` has been implemented as a complement to `isoweek()`, returning the ISO 8601 year corresponding to a given date, [#7154](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/7154). Thanks to @ben-schwen and @MichaelChirico for the suggestion and @venom1204 for the implementation.

> 16. Multiple improvements has been added to rolling functions. Request came from @gpierard who needed left aligned, adaptive, rolling max, [#5438](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/5438). There was no `frollmax` function yet. Adaptive rolling functions did not have support for `align="left"`. `frollapply` did not support `adaptive=TRUE`. Available alternatives were base R `mapply` or self-join using `max` and grouping `by=.EACHI`. As a follow up of his request, following features has been added:

Reviewer 2: Pls add an attribution!

- new function `frollmax`, applies `max` over a rolling window.
- support for `align="left"` for adaptive rolling function.
- support for `adaptive=TRUE` in `frollapply`.
- `partial` argument to trim window width to available observations rather than returning `NA` whenever window is not complete.
- `give.names` argument that can be used to automatically give the names based on the names of `x` and `n`.
- `frollmean` and `frollsum` no longer treat `Inf` and `-Inf` as `NA`s as it used to be for `algo="fast"` (breaking change).

> - `hasNA` argument has been renamed to `has.nf` to convey that it is not only related to `NA/NaN` but other non-finite values (`Inf/-Inf`) as well.

Reviewer 2: Should we also put this as breaking change?

```r
set.seed(108)
setDTthreads(16)
x = data.table(
  value = cumsum(rnorm(1e6, 0.1)),
  end_window = 1:1e6 + sample(50:500, 1e6, TRUE),
  row = 1:1e6
)[, "end_window" := pmin(end_window, .N)
  ][, "len_window" := end_window-row+1L]

baser = function(x) x[, mapply(function(from, to) max(value[from:to]), row, end_window)]
sj = function(x) x[x, max(value), on=.(row >= row, row <= end_window), by=.EACHI]$V1
frmax = function(x) x[, frollmax(value, len_window, adaptive=TRUE, align="left", has.nf=FALSE)]
frapply = function(x) x[, frollapply(value, len_window, max, adaptive=TRUE, align="left")]
microbenchmark::microbenchmark(
  baser(x), sj(x), frmax(x), frapply(x),
  times=10, check="identical"
)
#Unit: milliseconds
#       expr        min         lq       mean     median         uq        max neval
#   baser(x) 3094.88357 3097.84966 3186.74832 3163.58050 3251.66753 3370.33785    10
#      sj(x) 2221.55456 2255.12083 2306.61382 2303.47883 2346.70293 2412.62975    10
#   frmax(x)   17.45124   24.16809   28.10062   28.58153   32.79802   34.83941    10
# frapply(x)  272.07830  316.47060  366.94771  396.23566  416.06699  421.38701    10
```

> As of now, adaptive rolling max has no _on-line_ implemention (`algo="fast"`), it uses a naive approach (`algo="exact"`). Therefore further speed up is still possible if `algo="fast"` gets implemented.

Reviewer 3: "if algo=fast gets implemented" seems to imply that it is not implemented yet. But it is the default, so how can it work if it is not implemented? Can you please clarify?

Author: It does not work. It works using algo=exact. Note that it is only for adaptive rolling max.

> As of now, adaptive rolling max has no _on-line_ implemention (`algo="fast"`), it uses a naive approach (`algo="exact"`). Therefore further speed up is still possible if `algo="fast"` gets implemented.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of now, there is no _on-line_ implemention of `frollmax(algo="fast",adaptive=TRUE)`, so it will fall back to a naive approach (`algo="exact"`), and emit a warning (is this true? I would expect a warning or error if the user asks for one algo but it is not available). Further speed up may be possible in the future if `algo="fast"` gets implemented for this case.
```
